
                 P i e t y
                 =========
                
This is the Piety desktop, a self-contained 
computing environment running in a single
interactive Python session. Here you can
compose and read documents, create and run
Python code, browse internet web pages, and
access the host computer file system.

This text you are viewing right now,
desktop.txt, is an interactive tutorial on
getting started with the Piety desktop. As you
read through it, follow the directions to
issue commands and see their effects.

Scrolling
 
To read further in this tutorial, scroll down:
type C-v (control-V, hold down the CTRL key
and press the v key). Try it now! (You might
have to do it a few times, depending on the
height of this window.)

To scroll back up, type M-v (meta-V, hold down the
ALT key and press the v key). To go to the top,
type M-< (hold down the alt key and the shift
key and press the < key) and to go to the
end type M->.

You can move the cursor up or down one line at
a time by pressing the arrow keys, or C-n
(next, for down) and C-p (previous, for up).
When the cursor reaches the bottom (or top) of
the window, it will scroll down (or up).
  
Search

Instead of scrolling, it is often easier to
search for what you want.

Type C-s for forward search. A prompt appears
below the window on the left:
  
  Search string (default ...): 

Type in the string you want to search for --
try the string scroll -- then press ENTER. The
cursor moves forward to the next line that
contains that string. Press C-s again. Now the
cursor moves forward to the next occurence,
without prompting. And again and again. Search
continues without prompting until you type a
different keycode.

Type C-r for backward search. If it
immediately follows C-s or another C-r, it
searches for the same string without
prompting.

At the search prompt, the default is the
string you most recently searched for. Just
press ENTER to accept the default without
retyping it. You can edit at the prompt by
typing BACKSPACE and retyping. To cancel the
search operation, type ??? at the end of the
search string and press ENTER.

Search is case sensitive. Searching for
scroll will not find Scroll, etc.  

Search puts the cursor at the start of the
line containing the search string, not at
the search string itself.

To quickly find a section in this document,
search forward for its name in the following
table of contents.   To return to the table of
contents, search backward for the same name --
or search for Contents.

Contents
Scrolling (search backward from here)
Search (search backward from here)
Keys
Buffers
Windows
Refreshing windows
Buffers in windows
Directories
Files
Editing
Wrapping long lines
Commands
Web browsing
Python programming
Concurrent Tasks and the Clock
Quitting the desktop
Status messags  
Recovering from errors
More

Keys 

Key sequences like C-v and M-< are usually
just called keys. A list of Piety keys appears
in keys.txt. 

Many (but not all) keys used by Piety behave
like the same keys in the Emacs editor.
  
Buffers

In Piety, text is stored in named buffers.
Type C-x C-b to display the list of all the
buffers in the session here in this window.

Among the buffers are README.md, keys.txt,
viewer.py, and desktop.txt.  They were loaded
into buffers by the startup script that
started this Piety session.

Display the buffer that lists all the keys.
Type C-x b (just b, not C-b).  At the left
edge of the display, under the windows, this 
prompt appears:

Switch to buffer (default desktop.txt):

At the prompt, type keys.txt, the press ENTER.
keys.txt appears in this window. Scroll
through keys.txt.

To return to the buffer list, type C-x b again.
This time the prompt says:

Switch to buffer (default *Buffers*):

The default, *Buffers*, is the buffer list
itself - which is just another buffer. The
default is always the buffer that was just
previously displayed in that window. Just
press ENTER to accept the default and show the
buffer list.

To show the tutorial again, select
desktop.txt. There is another way to select a
buffer: use C-n (or C-p) to move the cursor to
the line that names desktop.txt. Then type
C-o. That buffer desktop.txt appears in this
window.

Now display keys.txt again. You already know
the buffer name, so you do not need to display
the buffer list. Just type C-x b. At the
prompt, type k? ENTER. keys.txt appears. You
only need to type enough of the buffer name to
indentify it, followed by ?.

Now get back to desktop.txt. Type C-x b. The
default is desktop.txt, that was just
previously displayed. Type ENTER to accept the
default. desktop.txt appears.

You can keep typing C-x b ENTER to switch
between the two most recent buffers. Try it.
End up back here at desktop.txt.

You can edit the buffer name at the C-x b prompt by
using the backspace key and re-typing. To
cancel the C-x b operation and retain the same
buffer, type ??? at the end of the buffer name
string, then type ENTER.

You can type C-x k to delete the current
buffer -- but don't do it now!

Windows

The desktop shows two or three windows. This
window here on the right is the viewer window.
The one or two windows on the left are editor
windows. Below the editor windows there is one
line used to prompt for buffer names, file
names, and search strings. Below that are some
lines for typing commands to the Python
interpreter.

 +-------------------+---------------+
 |  Editor window    |               |
 |                   | Viewer window |
 +-------------------+               |
 |  Editor window    |               |
 |                   |               |
 +-------------------+---------------+
 |Prompt:                            |
 |  Python interpreter               |
 +-----------------------------------+
 
The session starts up with one editor window,
showing an empty scratch buffer where you can
practice editing. You can edit here in the
viewer window too, but it usually displays
reference information -- like this tutorial.

Type C-x o to move the cursor from the viewer
window to an editor window. Type C-x v to move
the cursor back to the viewer window. Most
keys and commands work the same in any window.

Refreshing windows

Desktop windows can be defaced by unwanted
characters from sources outside Piety -- like
messages from the host operating system.
Or, they might be defaced by errors in the
Piety code itself.

Windows can often be repaired by refreshing
them (redrawing their buffer contents). 

To demonstrate, type M-g - 'graffiti' - to
write text over all three windows.  Now 
type C-l to refresh the current window,
or M-l to refresh both editor windows. Type
M-m to refresh the viewer window, even when
the cursor is in an editor window.
 
Buffers in windows

To display a buffer in any window, put the
cursor in that window and type C-x b. The
buffer you name at the prompt appears in that
window.

It can be convenient to leave the buffer list
displayed in the viewer window for reference,
load buffers into editor windows, and work on
them there.

You can load an editor window from the buffer
list in the viewer window by moving the cursor
over the buffer you want and typing M-o. But
it is often more convenient to just type C-b
and and the buffer name.

Put the cursor in the viewer window, then
use C-x b to display the tutorial desktop.txt
in the viewer window.

Then type C-x o to put the cursor in the
editor window. type C-x b to display README.md
in the editor window. Use C-v etc. to scroll
through README.md in the usual way.

You can continue reading the tutorial in the
viewer window while you work in the editor
window. To scroll the viewer window while
the cursor remains in the editor window, type C-t
(scroll down), M-t (scroll up), M-( (go to
top), M-) (go to end).

Type C-x 2 to split the editor window in two.
Now you can display two different locations in
the same buffer, README.md for now. The cursor
remains in the top window. Type C-v etc. to
scroll in this window. 

When there are two editor windows, C-x o
switches between them. Type C-x o to move the
cursor to the bottom window, and type C-v etc.
to scroll to a different location. Repeat C-x o
to switch between windows, ending in the
bottom window.

Display another buffer in this window. 
Type C-x B and select viewer.py. Now you can
view and scroll both windows. 

Type C-x 1 to delete the other editor window.

Directories

You can create a buffer by loading its
contents from a file on disk. To see what 
files are there, type C-x C-d to list a
directory.   A prompt appears:

 List directory (default /home/jon/Piety): 

The default is the current working directory.
Just press ENTER to list its contents. The
directory listing appears in the viewer window
in a buffer named *Console*. Often the listing
is longer than the window, use C-v etc to
scroll through the listing in the usual way.

The file names appear in the column on the
right. File names that are followed by the
slash character / are subdirectories.

To list a subdirectory, type its name at the
prompt. Try it: type C-x C-d, then type
viewer, then press ENTER. The directory
listing for the viewer sudirectory appears at
the end of the *Console* buffer and the
previous directory listing scrolls up.

You must type the complete directory name 
at the promt.  You cannot abbreviate it and
type ?.  You can edit it by using BACKSPACE
and then retyping.  You can cancel the operation
by typing ??? at the end of the string, then 
ENTER.

There is another way to list a subdirectory.
Try it: position the cursor over the line with
the __pycache__ subdirectory and type C-o, Its
directory listing appears at the end of the
*Console* buffer, at the bottom of the viewer
window.

You can list any directory in the file system 
by typing its absolute path, or its path relative
to the current working directory. In relative
paths, ou can use the abbreviation .. for the
parent directory of the current directory.

Listing a directory does not change the current
working directory.
 
Files

You can create a buffer by loading its
contents from a file on disk. Type C-x C-f.
Find file: appears on the prompt line. There
is no default. Type the name of a file in the
current working directory, or type the
relative or absolute path to any file in the
file system, then press ENTER. The file
contents appear in a new buffer in the current
window.

Try it. Type C-x o to put the cursor in an
editor window. Type C-x C-f then README.md
ENTER. The contents of the README.md in the
current working diretory - your Piety
directory - appear in the window.

Type C-x C-b to show the buffer list in the
viewer window. The list contains two entries
that look similar to this:
 ...
 README.md           460   /home/jon/Piety/viewer/README.md  saved
 ...
 README.md<2>        167   /home/jon/Piety/README.md       saved

There are buffers for two README.md files from
different directories. The Piety software
named the second buffer README.md<2> with the
suffix <2> to ensure that each buffer has a
unique name.

Now try a relative path. Type C-x C-f then
viewer/vpm.py ENTER. The new buffer vpm.py and
its contents appears in the current window.

You can always show the current working
directory by typing C-x C-d. It appears in the
prompt. Type ??? to dismiss the prompt.

You must type the complete file name 
at the prompt.  You cannot abbreviate it and
type ?.  You can edit it by using BACKSPACE
and then retyping.  You can cancel the operation
by typing ??? at the end of the string, then 
ENTER.

There is another way to load a file. Put the
cursor over the file name in the directory 
listing.  Type M-o to open that file in
an editor window, or type C-o to open the
file in the viewer window.

It can be convenient to leave the directory
listing displayed in the viewer window for
reference, load files into editor windows, and
work on them there.
 
If you type a file name that does not already
exist in the file system, Piety creates a new
empty buffer, which you can edit and save to 
make a new file.

Type C-x C-s to save a buffer to its file,
with its same file name.

Type C-x C-w to save a buffer to a different
file, prompt for the new file name.

Editing

You can edit the text in any window, including
the viewer window. You can edit anything;
there are no read-only buffers. 

To enter text, just position the cursor where
you want it and type. ENTER, BACKSPACE, and
the arrow keys all have the expected effect.
Piety provides editing keys for moving around
in the buffer and for searching, selecting,
deleting, cutting, pasting, and formatting
text.  See keys.txt
 
The editing keys work the same as in the Emacs
editor.

Editing deserves its own tutorial, but at this
time we don't have one. In the meantime, you
can consult keys.txt and experiment in
scratch.txt. 

Wrapping long lines

One editing operation you will need soon is
wrapping long lines, so you can fit them into
windows, especially the narrow viewer window.

In the scratch.txt buffer, find the line near 
the end that begins 'Here is a long line ...'.
Put the cursor at the start of this line.
Type M-q to wrap the line so it fits in the
window. Now you can see all of its text in two
consecutive lines.

To restore the single long line, put the
cursor at the beginning of the second line and
type BACKSPACE to join it to the first.
 
Commands

In addition to typing keycodes, you can also
type commands: Python statements, usually
function calls. Type them at the Python
interpreter, which is always available at the
bottom of the Piety desktop.

Type M-x to put the cursor at the Python
prompt at the bottom of the display. You are
now in the Python REPL (Read- Evaluate-Print-
Loop), and can type any Python statement.

Piety defines many commands which have names
and effects similar to commands in the host
system shell. They print their output to the
end of the *Console* buffer in the viewer
window.

If you make an error while typing a command,
an error message appears in the *Errors* buffer
in the viewer window, nof in the REPL region.

Try it. type the command pwd() to print
the current working directory in *Console*. On
the following line in the REPL, the Python
prompt reappears, with the cursor ready for
you to type another statement. 

Type the command cd('viewer') to
change to the viewer subdirectory. Then
repeat the pwd() command to confirm that is
the new working directory.  Type ls() to
show the short form directory listing for
the current directory, lsl() to show the
long form listing, and lslt() to show the
long form listing with the most recently 
updated files at the top.

The help(obj) command shows Python help for
that Python object in its own buffer with
extension .help, in the viewer window. Try
help(viewer), to create the buffer
viewer.help. Type help(str) to create str.help
showing all the builtin Python string methods.

The man('...') command shows the host computer's
manual entry for the named item in its own
buffer with extension .man, in the viewer
window. Try man('man'), to create the buffer
man.man about the online manual utility,, or
man('ls') to create ls.man showing all the
host ls command options.
 
Use the sh('...') command to run any host
computer shell command in the Python REPL.
Just enclose the entire shell command within
quotes.  This is necessary to run shell commands
that have not been provided as Python functions,
for example git version control commands. 
 
When you are finished using the Python REPL,
type the command de() ('display editor') to
return the cursor to the desktop window you
were most recently using.

The command pm() also returns the cursor 
to the window. Some older Piety documentation
uses pm() not de().  The commands ve() ved() 
and ee() also work.

Try it, type de() at the REPL.  Now type
C-x C-d to confirm that the new default
directory is still the viewer subdirectory.
 
You can recall previous commands in the REPL
so you do not have to type them again.  At the
Python prompt, you can type C-p (or up arrow)
as many times as you need to find a previous
command, and then type C-n (or down arrow) to
return to more recent commands. Now try C-p
and C-n to retrieve pwd() and ls(), then type
ENTER after each to repeat the command. You
can also edit the current line in the REPL by
using BACKSPACE and then typing new text.

You can use the M-y key to enter just a
single Python statement on the prompt line,
and then return to the desktop window
immediately, without having to type the de()
command. Using C-p (etc.) to access command
history and ??? to cancel the request also
work at this prompt.

Every Piety key discussed in this document
and keys.txt calls a Python function. You can
type the function call at the REPL instead of
typing the key. Sometimes this is convenient
when in the midst of typing several Python
statements.

Consult the source code to find which function
is invoked by each key: the keymap
dictionaries in editors/dmacs.py, editline.py,
and pmacs.py, and also the assignements to to
dmacs.keymap near the end of browser/get.py
and render.py, and viewer/viewer.py.

Web browsing

You can browse the web in the Piety desktop.
Downloaded web pages appear in editor buffers.
The pages do not appear in the list of
ordinary buffers shown by typing C-x C-b. Type
C-x C-w to show *Webpages*, the list of web
page buffers.

To get started web browsing, type C-x C-b to
display the list of ordinary buffers, then put
the cursor at urls.py and type C-o to display
it in the viewer window. This buffer is just a
list of the URLs of some sample web sites,
analogous to bookmarks. Place the cursor over
the line that says:
hn = 'https://news.ycombinator.com/' 
and type C-o. The Hacker News front page
appears in the viewer window.

The URL for the web page appears in the 
first line of the buffer, along with a 
timestamp telling when the page was loaded.
If the URL is long, the timestamp may be 
pushed off the right side of the window.
To see it, wrap the line: put the cursor
on that first line and type M-q.
 
Hacker News is a 'link aggregator' with a
'front page' where each entry contains a link
to an 'article page' elsewhere on the web,
along with a link to a 'comments page' that
contains comments on that article.  Many 
web sites have this organization.
The three windows on the Piety desktop - the
viewer window and two editor windows - 
can show the front page, an article page,
and its comments page at the same time.

Typing C-o on a line that contains a URL opens
that page in the current window, usually the
viewer window. Typing M-o opens it on the
other window, an editor window. The URL does
not have to be in a web page -- it can be in
any kind of buffer. You can create files that
contain URLs and other notes you want to save,
our urls.py is just an example.
 
In the Hacker News front page in the viewer
window, scroll to an interesting entry and put
the cursor at the beginning of its first line.
I found this entry (when you look, it will no
longer be on the front page, so you must find
another):

_New copy of earliest poem in English, written 1,3k years ago,
discovered in Rome_ [16]_tcd.ie_ [17]_giuliomagnifico_ [18]_19
hours ago_ [19]_hide_ [20]_120 comments_ [21]

Move the cursor to the line that begins
'discovered in Rome_ [16] ...' (or whatever is
the first footnote in the entry you found).
Type M-o. The linked article page from the web
appears in an editor window. The article's URL
appears on the first line of the buffer, and 
in the window's status line. You can scroll
through the buffer in the usual way. You often
have to scroll down past several pages of
header text to reach the interesting content.

In the Piety browser, link text is delimited
by underscores, and the corresponding URL is
indicated by a footnote (the full URL text
appears in the Links section at the end of the
buffer, at that footnote number). Typing M-o
opens the web page indicated by the next
footnote on the line in an editor window.

Type C-x 2 to split the editor window into
two. Type C-x o to move the cursor to the
other editor window. Type C-x v to move the
cursor back to the Hacker News entry in the
viewer window. Put the cursor on the last line
in the entry, which ends with something like
'... _120 comments_ [21]' Put the cursor
before that final footnote, and type M-o. The
Hacker News comments page appears in the other
window, below (or above) the article page.

Now you see the Hacker News front page in the
viewer window, the article page in one editor
window, and the Hacker News comment page on
that article in the other editor window. Type
C-x o to switch between the article and the
comments, where you can scroll through each.
When you are finished reading the article and
comments, type C-x v to return to the front
page in the viewer, where you can scroll to
another entry.

Near the bottom of the front page body (above
the Links section), at the end of a line, you
can find something like '_More_ [188]'. Put
the cursor before that footnote and type C-o
to display the next Hacker News page in the
viewer.

Type C-x C-w to show the list of web page
buffers in the viewer window. The page URLs
appear in the buffer list entries, instead of
file names.

For each web page, there are two buffers: an
.html buffer that holds the HTML source, and
an .htxt buffer that holds the rendered text.
When you select a page with C-o or M-o, Piety
displays the rendered .htxt page. Typing C-x
C-w just shows the list of .htxt pages. 

If you want to see any web page again, you can
select its buffer in the usual way -- this is
analogous to clicking on a browser tab.

If you want to see the HTML source, you can
generate a buffer list that includes all
buffers including the .html buffers by typing
the command edsel.N() in the Python REPL.
Select an .html buffer from this list in the
usual way to show its source in a window --
this is analogous to the View Source
operation.
 
You can use the gr command (get and render) 
to type in a URL at the REPL and view the
page. Its argument is a URL string.
So you could load the Hacker News page by
typing the command:
gr('https://news.ycombinator.com/')
This is useful when you see a URL printed
somewhere but you don't already have a buffer
that contains the URL string.

The file urls.py assigns each URL string to 
a variable, so you can just pass that variable
to the command: gr(hn)

Sometimes you want to reload a page that is
frequently updated, like a front page or a
comments page.  C-x C-l reloads the page in
the current buffer. Notice the time stamp
updates. (This command actually creates new
buffers for the latest version.)
 
You can delete web page buffers one by one
with C-x k in the usual way. The command
clear_webpages() deletes all the web page
buffers from the session (all the buffers
whole names end in .html or .htxt).

Be warned that web browsing with Piety can be
frustrating, because many web sites reject
requests from a homemade browser. Instead,
they respond with HTTP Error 403: Forbiden, or
429: Too Many Requests, or some other error
code. They are trying to avoid being exploited
by robots -- which Piety is not, but the sites
can't see that. The User-agent string in
Piety's HTTP requests includes the string
'Lynx', which sometimes helps, but not often.

When Piety receives an HTTP Error, it displays
a traceback that shows the error code at the end,
in the *Errors* buffer in the viewer window.
You can then go on to try another web site.  
Sometimes trying the same site again later works.

To see a sample *Errors* page, try to load the
last URL in urls.py. Display urls.py in the
viewer window, put the cursor on the last
line, that begins notfound = ..., and type
M-o.
 
Python programming

You can develop and test Python code 
in a desktop session, without exiting 
and restarting, or losing session state.
(To make it possible to reload a module
without re-initializing its data, which would
lose its state, you must code the module in
the style described in the Reloading modules
section in How we program, editors/HOW.md.)

Piety itself was developed in long-running
Python sessions.   The desktop was designed 
to make this easy, and remove any need to
resort to the host desktop or terminal 
windows.

You can edit Python modules in buffers, and 
save them to files in the usual way.

You can type the standard Python import and
reload commands in the REPL. You can invoke
individual functions, and inspect and assign
Python variables, in the REPL.

Type C-x C-r to save the current buffer -- a
Python module -- and reload it into the
session.

Attempting to reload a module can fail if the
revised code contains errors. This happens
often -- any syntax error causes reload to
fail. If reload fails, the traceback appears
in the *Errors* buffer in the viewer window.
You can then edit the module to correct the
error, and try to reload again.
  
To see an example of an *Errors* page on reload,
put the cursor in any buffer which does not
hold a Python module, such as scratch.txt,
and type C-x C-r.   Piety attempts to reload 
it and fails with a traceback which appears
in *Errors*.  In this case the error shown at
the end of the traceback is KeyError, because 
the buffer name is not a key in the dictionary
of modules loaded in the session.

Use sh('git ...') to invoke commands of the 
git version control system. 

Concurrent Tasks and the Clock

Piety provides concurrency with a Python
asyncio event loop named piety.

To start the event loop, type the startpiety
command at the Python prompt in the REPL:

    >>> startpiety()
    >>>>
    
Now the prompt in the Python REPL has expanded
from three darts >>> to four >>>> to show the
event loop is running. The name of the event
loop is piety:

    >>>> piety
    <_UnixSelectorEventLoop running=True
    closed=False debug=False>
 
To return to display editing from the >>>>
prompt -- while the event loop is running --
type the command ade() (not de(), which you
use from the >>> prompt when the event loop is
not running). The command apm() also works.
However, you still use M-x to return from 
display editing to the >>>> prompt.

When the event loop is running, you can start
tasks. Start the on-screen clock:

    >>>> startclock()

The clock appears in the upper right corner of
the terminal and updates every second.

The *tasks* command shows information about
all the tasks that are running in the *piety*
event loop:

    >>>> tasks() {<Task pending name='Task-1'
    coro=<AClock.aclock() running at
    /home/jon/Piety/piety/aclock.py:35>
    wait_for=<Future pending
    cb=[Task.task_wakeup()]>>}

(the REPL and the editors are not considered
to be *asyncio* tasks.)

The *stopclock* command stops the clock:

    >>>> stopclock()
    
The clock stops ticking. Its task has exited
-- the set of asyncio tasks is now empty:

    >>>> tasks()
    set()
    
To remove the clock from the display, refresh
the viewer window by typing the command
vvrefresh(), or, while display editing, typing
the M-m key.

You can resume the clock by typing the
startclock command again.

To stop the event loop, type C-d at the >>>>
prompt in the Python REPL. The >>> prompt with
three darts reappears. The event loop is no
longer running. If the clock is displayed, it
stops ticking.

Now you must use de() again, not ade(), to
return to display editing.

You can restart the event loop with startpiety().

More demonstrations and experiments with the
event loop are described in piety/piety.md and
piety/aiotimers.md.

Quitting the desktop

Type the command quit() to quit the desktop,
exit Python, and return to the host system
command prompt. The command quit() prints the
list of unsaved buffers and ask you if you
really want to quit.

Type the command unsaved() at any time to
print the list of unsaved buffers.

Status messages

Piety somtimes prints  messages in the REPL 
region, that might look like error messages.
In fact, these are status messages that do
not indicate any problem and do not require
any action.  Here are some examples:

? line 703 out of range 1 .. 702

? buffer keys.txt is already the current 
 buffer

*Console*, at line 59570 of 59577,
 file *Console*, unsaved changes

Recovering from errors
 
Errors and exceptional conditions can cause
the Piety code to crash (terminate suddenly,
often printing diagnostic information called a
traceback). 

Fortunately, a crash usually just affects
the function containing the error. Other data
including the session state are unaffected, so
unsaved work is not lost and the Piety session
can continue.

Most crashes cause a traceback to appear in
the *Errors* buffer in the viewer window (see
Web browsing and Python programming above).
After *Errors* appears, the cursor moves to
the REPL. From there, you can type any
commands to resume the session. Often, you
type de() to return to a window.   You
may need to type C-l, M-l, or M-m to refresh
windows.

A crash might cause The terminal to stop
echoing -- when you type in the REPL,
characters do not appear. Sometimes you can
fix this by typing the command tl() --
'terminal line mode' -- and then typing ENTER.
This tl() command will not appear either, and
if you typed it incorrectly, an error message
will appear. If you do manage to type tl()
correctly, echoing might resume and you can
see the commands again.

You can deliberately crash Piety by typing
C-z. Try it. A traceback appears in *Errors*
in the viewer. The end of the traceback
indicates the crash was due to a
ZeroDivisionError, and shows the line of code
that caused the crash.
 
Some errors -- not necessarily crashes --
cause the terminal itself to stop working
properly. The cursor might freeze -- it does
not move when you type codes or use the arrow
keys. Sometimes, typing C-q fixes this. 
Or, the cursor might just disappear -- none of
the cursor movement commands nor M-x cause it
to reappear. In this situation, using the
mouse or trackpad -- not the keyboard -- to
move the cursor to another location sometimes
restores it.

If nothing works to recover your session, the
last resort is to abandon the session and start
a new one.   This will lose any unsaved work.
To end the session, use the host software to 
close the terminal window that holds the Piety
desktop. Then open a new terminal window,
enlarge it to full screen, and at the system
prompt, type the command to start a new
session:

 python3 -im piety

More

There is more about the Piety desktop we have
not discussed here. You can find details in
these files:

Piety/editors/README.md
Piety/viewer/README.md
Piety/browser/README.md
Piety/piety/README.md

Revised Jul 2026
  
